Stocks making the biggest moves premarket: Nvidia, Delta Air Lines, Eli Lilly & more

Fred Imbert
CNBC

Check out the companies making the biggest moves premarket:

Nvidia — The chipmaker traded slightly higher after CEO Jensen Huang said he expects orders for its Blackwell and Vera Rubin chips to reach $1 trillion through 2027.

Delta Air Lines — Shares traded more than 4% higher after the company raised its first-quarter revenue growth guidance, calling for high single-digit expansion. The airline previously called for growth between 5% and 7%.

Oil stocks — The group rose as crude prices resumed their march higher, with traders casting doubt around a U.S.-backed plan to escort tankers through the Strait of Hormuz. Exxon Mobil was up around 1%, while Occidental Petroleum gained 1.4%. The State Street Energy Select Sector SPDR ETF (XLE) also advanced 1%.

Eli Lilly — The pharma giant fell 1.1% after an HSBC downgrade to reduce from hold. Analysts at the bank said the total market for obesity drugs seems “inflated.” They added: “We think Lilly shares are priced to perfection, are uncomfortable with working capital trends, and think medium-term earnings trends are optimistic.”

Builders FirstSource — The building products stock ticked nearly 2% higher after a regulatory filing showed director Paul Levy bought 50,000 shares at $87.73 each. The shares were worth a combined $4.4 million at purchase time.

Honeywell International — Shares slipped more than 1%. CEO Vimal Kapur said at a conference that while the situation in the Middle East is fluid and a “high single-digit” of the company’s annual revenue comes from the region, Honeywell does not “see any impact to us right now for the quarter or the year.”

Uber — Shares are up 3% after the ridesharing company said it would launch robotaxis powered by Nvidia’s self-driving software to its ride-sharing platform beginning in 2027 in San Francisco and Los Angeles. The company also plans to expand its fleet to 28 cities internationally by 2028.

CNBC’s Itzel Franco, Davis Giangiulio and Liz Napolitano contributed reporting.