Wholesale prices rose 0.7% in February, much more than expected and up 3.4% annually

Jeff Cox
CNBC


The producer price index, a measure of pipeline costs that producers receive for their products, increased a seasonally adjusted 0.7% on the month. The core PPI was up 0.5%.
On a 12-month basis, PPI inflation was at 3.4%, the most since February 2025, while core was at 3.9%, according to the BLS.
Food prices rose 2.4% while energy was up 2.3%. Within food, the index for fresh and dry vegetables soared 48.9%.

Wholesale prices rose sharply in February, providing another sign that inflation continues to percolate even aside from rising energy costs.

The producer price index, a measure of pipeline costs that producers receive for their products, increased a seasonally adjusted 0.7% on the month, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported Wednesday. Excluding volatile food and energy costs, the so-called core PPI increased 0.5%.

Economists surveyed by Dow Jones had been looking for increases of 0.3% for both measures.

For the all-items index, prices rose faster than the 0.5% pace in January. However, the core increase was less than the 0.8% for the prior month.

On a 12-month basis, headline PPI inflation was at 3.4%, the most since February 2025, while core was at 3.9%, according to the BLS. The Federal Reserve targets inflation at 2%.

Stock market futures slipped following the report while Treasury yields were higher. Futures traders pushed out the next Fed interest rate cut until at least December.

The surge in PPI came due in large part to a 0.5% increase in services costs, something the Fed would not welcome. Policymakers have attributed much of the recent run-up in inflation to tariffs, which would not show up as much on the services end. Portfolio management fees, a key driver for services costs within the PPI measurement, were up 1% in February. Similarly, prices for securities brokerage, dealing, investment advice and related services accelerated 4.2%.

Goods prices rose 1.1% on the month.

Food prices rose 2.4% while energy was up 2.3%. Within food, the index for fresh and dry vegetables soared 48.9%.

The report suggests that pipeline inflation pressures remain persistent, particularly on the services side, complicating the Fed’s path as it weighs how long to keep interest rates elevated.

The report comes with inflation worries accelerating amid the fighting in the Middle East. The U.S. and Israel continue to strike at targets in Iran, causing energy prices to surge. Oil has been trading around $100 a barrel, up more than 70% year to date as the conflict has proceeded.

None of the inflation data so far has captured the price increases associated with the war. But it has indicated that even before the attacks, inflation was a problem. A report last week indicated that consumer prices rose at a 2.4% rate in February. Separately, the Commerce Department said its main inflation gauge, which the Fed uses as its forecasting tool, was at 3.1% for core and 2.8% for headline.

Later Wednesday, the Fed will release its latest interest rate decision. Market participants consider it a near certainty that central bankers will vote to keep their benchmark overnight interest rate anchored in a range between 3.5%-3.75%, where it has been since the last cut in December 2025.