Stocks making the biggest moves premarket: Nvidia, Micron Technology, Macy’s and more


Liz Napolitano
CNBC

Check out the companies making headlines before the bell.

Nvidia — Nvidia rose nearly 1% after Reuters reported, citing sources, that the chipmaker got approval from the Chinese government to sell its H200 chips in China. The company is also reportedly preparing to make available in China a version of its Groq AI chip.

Micron Technology — The memory and storage solutions firm saw shares tick up 2.1% ahead of its fiscal second-quarter earnings report expected after the bell on Wednesday.

Macy’s — The retailer popped 8% on better-than-expected results for the fourth quarter. Macy’s earned $1.67 per share on revenue of $7.64 billion. Analysts polled by LSEG expected a profit of $1.53 per share on revenue of $7.62 billion.

Block — Shares of the payments technology company jumped more than 2% after two upgrades on the stock. Rothschild & Co Redburn moved their rating to hold from sell after five years, while Truist upgraded the stock to buy from hold. Both said Block’s lower price-to-earnings valuation was one of the reasons for their respective upgrades.

CF Industries — CF Industries declined nearly 4% after Mizuho downgraded the stock to underperform from neutral, even as the investment firm slightly raised its price target on shares to $100 from $95.

Constellation Brands — Shares popped 2.5% on the back of Citi’s upgrade to buy from neutral. Citi said the alcohol producer has improving topline trends while having a historically low valuation.

Lululemon — Shares of the athletic apparel retailer topped the Street’s fiscal fourth-quarter expectations, but shares declined roughly 1% on the back of weaker-than-expected sales and earnings forecasts for full-year 2026. Lululemon said it is expecting sales to be between $11.35 billion and $11.50 billion, below expectations of $11.52 billion, per LSEG. Its earnings guidance of $12.10 to $12.30 per share also missed consensus estimates of $12.58.

Knight-Swift Transportation — The transportation stock, which provides truckload services, popped 3% following an upgrade to buy from neutral at UBS. As catalysts, the bank cited growing visibility that there will be a supply reduction in the industry and strengthening truckload pricing as a result.

SL Green Realty — Manhattan’s largest commercial office landlord gained 2.7% after Deutsche Bank Research upgraded the stock to buy from hold. Analyst Peter Abramowitz wrote in a note titled “Don’t Sleep On The City That Never Does” that he expects strong execution on asset sales and refinancings to be a positive catalyst for the stock. The stock is down more than 42% off its recent high.

DocuSign — The software stock gained 2.1% in the after-hours session. DocuSign beat fourth-quarter estimates and gave strong guidance for its first quarter and fiscal year. The company anticipates first-quarter revenues to come out between $822 million and $826 million, while analysts polled by LSEG expected $813 million.

CNBC’s Fred Imbert, Pia Singh, Alex Harring, Davis Giangiulio, Lisa Kailai Han and Sarah Min contributed reporting.