Title: Chair Powell Is Not Leaving And Other Observations
Source: Seeking Alpha
Date: Mar 20, 2026
Tickers: SPY, DIA, QQQ, IVV, VOO, IWM, SPX, SP500, NDX, DJI, RTY, US10Y, US2Y, US30Y

By Michael Gray

FOMC Policy Decision

As expected, the Fed left the Fed Funds Rate unchanged at 3.50%-3.75%. This is the second consecutive FOMC meeting with a rate pause. The vote was 11-1, with one member wanting a 25 basis point rate reduction.

Powell’s rationale is that the economy has been expanding at a solid pace. He views the labor market as stable, with unemployment changing little in recent months, even though job gains have slowed. Inflation remains elevated.

The recent developments in the Middle East make the outlook for the economy uncertain. Given the Fed’s move to policy normalization with 75 basis points in rate cuts late last year, Powell feels the Fed is well positioned to wait for new developments as a guide to the extent and timing of further rate adjustments.

Powell Holds The Cards

Powell’s most significant comment came when he was asked what would happen if the new Fed Chair was not confirmed by May 15th.

His response was that he would continue to serve as Chair pro tem until confirmation, which is what the law calls for.

He then emphatically stated that he has no intention of leaving the Fed Board of Governors until the DOJ investigation against him is completely closed.

This is a startling revelation, as it is a direct challenge to the current administration and President Trump, who has been completely open about his desire to get rid of Chair Powell.

Although Powell’s position as Fed Chair ends on May 15th, his term on the Fed Board of Governors does not expire until January 31, 2028. Until now, he has not revealed what his intentions were as far as his Board seat. Historically, most Fed Chairs have left the Board of Governors after their Chairmanship ends.

By staying on the Board, Powell blocks President Trump’s ability to control the Fed.

To be able to assert his views on the Fed, President Trump needs to control at least 4 of the 7 Fed Governor positions. He currently has three: Governors Christopher Waller and Michelle Bowman, who were both appointed by President Trump during his first term, and the recently appointed Stephen Miran. If Chair Powell resigns from the Board when his term as Chair expires in May, Trump could use Powell’s seat for his new Chair nominee, Kevin Warsh. That would give the president control of the Board.

With that majority, he then could replace all 12 of the regional Fed Presidents, who serve as a voting member of the FOMC on a rotating basis. He then could have complete control of the Fed.

But Powell holds all the cards.

By staying on the Board, the President only controls three seats. And one of them, that held by Stephen Miran, is necessary for him to use for his new Chair nominee. Since Kevin Warsh is not currently a Fed Board member, Trump needs an open seat in order for Warsh to be added to the Board.

As it stands, Miran’s term on the board expired on January 31. However, as permitted, he has remained on the board until a replacement is confirmed by the Senate.

President Trump tried to create another open seat on the Board of Governors when he fired Lisa Cook last summer. This was the first time in the more than 100-year history of the Fed that a president has tried to fire a Fed Governor.

Cook, who believed her dismissal was illegal, appealed the firing. A Federal court blocked her removal, and the case worked its way up to the Supreme Court. A hearing was held in January, and the decision is pending.

This is viewed as a critical test case regarding Fed independence.

Powell’s situation is also a critical test of Fed independence. In the DOJ case, Powell is being accused of mismanagement of the renovation of Fed headquarters and lying about it in sworn testimony before the Senate last summer.

On January 9th, the DOJ issued grand jury subpoenas to the Federal Reserve Board and Chair Powell regarding that testimony. This is the first time in the history of the Fed that a sitting Fed Chair has faced a potential criminal prosecution from the government.

Chair Powell responded by publicly saying the DOJ investigation was a pretext for him making independent Monetary Policy decisions based on the data, rather than following the preferences of the President to cut rates. He and the Fed filed a motion to stop the subpoenas.

In a stunning opinion released last week, Chief Judge James Boasberg of the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia sided with the Federal Reserve and quashed the subpoenas.

The judge stated, “A mountain of evidence suggests that the Government served these subpoenas on the Board to pressure its Chair into voting for lower interest rates or resigning. On the other side of the scale, the Government produced essentially zero evidence to suspect Chair Powell of a crime; indeed, its justifications are so thin and unsubstantiated that the Court can only conclude that they are pretextual.”

Such a strong opinion essentially ends any investigation into Chair Powell. Yet, the DOJ and President Trump refuse to give up.

Just yesterday, while meeting in the Oval Office with Japanese Prime Minister Sanae Takaichi, President Trump indicated he supported the DOJ continuing their investigation. He stated, “He’s under investigation because he’s building a building for hundreds of billions of dollars more than it’s supposed to cost.” And President Trump added Powell “should be lowering rates immediately.”

If DOJ pushes forward with the investigation, it will only further delay Warsh’s confirmation.

Senator Thom Tillis, R-NC, a key member of the Senate Banking Committee, is a stumbling block. He has publicly stated, “If there were any remaining doubt whether advisers within the Trump Administration were actively pushing to end the independence of the Federal Reserve, there should now be none. It is now the independence and credibility of the Department of Justice that are in question. I will oppose the confirmation of any nominee for the Fed, including the upcoming Fed Chair vacancy, until this legal matter is resolved.”

The Senate Banking Committee has a 13-11 Republican majority. Without Tillis’ support confirmation of Warsh will be near impossible.

Confirmation is also running against the clock. There are only 8 weeks left until May 15th, and the Senate is closed for recess for 3 of them. That is precious little time to complete a confirmation, even if one were on the schedule, which presently it is not.

Even if the DOJ investigation is resolved, Chair Powell stated that whether or not he will continue to serve as a Board Governor has not been decided yet. He stated, “I will make that decision based on what I think is best for the institution and the people we serve.”

Summary of Economic Projections

Along with their policy announcement, the Fed released their new quarterly Summary of Economic Projections. These represent the FOMC members’ best forecasts for GDP growth, unemployment, inflation, and interest rates.

The most closely watched is their interest rate forecast, which covers the Fed’s outlook for policy adjustments. This is commonly referred to as the Dot Plot.

The consensus is for one 25 basis point rate cut this year. Of the 19 members, 7 are looking for zero rate cuts and 7 are looking for one rate cut, while 2 members expect 2 cuts, another 2 expect 3 rate cuts, and 1 member is looking for 4 rate cuts, or a 100 basis point reduction in the Fed Funds rate.

While the consensus is unchanged from the December SEP at 3.4%, the dispersion of estimates has narrowed. The range of estimates for year-end 2026 Fed Funds in December was between 2.1%-3.9% while the current range is now 2.6%-3.6%.

Although the Fed is still looking for lower rates this year, the bond market has been moving in the opposite direction.

Since the Middle East war began three weeks ago, bond yields have jumped, led by the front end, which has caused the yield curve to flatten.

The yield on the 2-year Treasury Note has surged by 48 basis points to 3.85%, while the yield on the 10-year Treasury Note has climbed 33 basis points to 4.27%, with the long bond yield rising 22 basis points to 4.83%.

The bond market has been tightening on its own in response to the fear that the spike in oil prices will lead to higher inflation and a slowing economy.

On the inflation front, the Fed has revised up projections from December. PCE is expected to be 2.7% at year-end, up from the 2.4% forecast in December. Core PCE is projected at 2.7% by year end, up from 2.5% in December.

To me, these projections don’t make sense because we currently are above the projected year-end levels. Last week’s Core PCE release was reported at 3.1% year over year. This is up for the third consecutive month and is the highest level in two years. While Chair Powell talks about inflation as being elevated, it has been above the Fed’s 2% target for five years and is moving in the wrong direction. Plus, the inflation figures have yet to reflect the surge in oil due to the Middle East conflict.

Additionally, while Chair Powell says that he expects inflation to come down as the uptick in goods from the tariffs rolls over, the surge in inflation is primarily due to an increase in core services PCE, which are unrelated to tariffs.

Core services represent almost 60% of PCE and have accelerated to 3.4% year over year. There is no indication this is coming down anytime soon.

As for employment, Chair Powell did a good job explaining why the loss of 92,000 jobs in February is less of a concern.

He stated, “I think you have to take the two together. In a way, the January report was a positive surprise, and the February report was a negative surprise. If you put them together, you get something in the middle. Over the past six months, effectively there’s zero net job creation in the private sector. But actually, that looks like that’s what the economy needs in terms of dealing with very, very low, nonexistent really, growth in the labor force. You’ve got a zero-growth employment equilibrium.”

He explained further, “In a world where both supply and demand for workers have come down very, very sharply over the course of the past year, due to immigration policy largely, a ratio is going to be a better thing to look at than job creation. So, the ratio is the unemployment rate, and it has been stable since September.”

There seemingly are many inconsistencies with the SEPs, and Chair Powell acknowledged that right now there is a lot of uncertainty, and they just don’t know. He stated, “If we were ever going to skip a SEP, this would be a good one, because we just don’t know.”

Global Central Banks Are Bracing For Rate Hikes

Many central bankers around the globe are focusing on the risks of inflation rising due to the surge in oil prices tied to the conflict in the Middle East.

The Reserve Bank of Australia lifted rates in March to 4.1%, the highest level in 10 months.

The Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the ECB, and the Central Bank of Switzerland all held rates steady this week, showing concern that rising energy prices could spark a wave of inflation.

Christine Lagarde, the President of the ECB, commented on how the Middle East war has created upside risks to inflation and downside risks for economic growth. Some estimate that the ECB will raise rates twice this year.

Governor Andrew Bailey of the Bank of England has signaled that they stand ready to raise interest rates to prevent the acceleration of inflation. This is a change from earlier hopes of near-term rate cuts.

Bank of Japan Governor Kazuo Ueda has not ruled out interest rate hikes amid concern over the impact of the Middle East conflict on inflation and the economic outlook.

These comments have caused bond yields to surge. Over the past three weeks, 2-year UK gilt yields have climbed almost 90 basis points to 4.49%. Two-year German Bunds have jumped more than 50 basis points to 2.53%, and 2-year U.S. Treasury notes have climbed 48 basis points to 3.85%.

Conclusion

In an 11-1 vote, the Fed held rates steady at 3.50%-3.75% for the second consecutive FOMC meeting. Their overall view is that following the 75 basis points in rate cuts late last year, they are well positioned to see what impact the current conflict in the Middle East will have on inflation and the economy.

Their dot plot for Fed Funds again projects a year-end rate of 3.4%, 25 basis points lower than the present.

Other SEP metrics show an uptick in inflation and a stable labor market, although the Fed’s degree of confidence in their projections is quite low.

The big surprise from this FOMC press briefing was Chair Powell addressing for the first time his plans for when his term as Chair expires on May 15th. If the current nominee, Kevin Warsh, is not confirmed by the Senate by that date, Chair Powell will remain as Chair pro tem, as is permitted by law, until his replacement is confirmed.

More importantly, Chair Powell emphatically stated that he will not leave the Board of Governors until his DOJ investigation has completely ended.

While U.S. District Court Judge Boasberg seemingly put to rest the investigation when he quashed the DOJ’s subpoenas for relevant information on the Fed’s headquarters renovation and Powell’s summer testimony to Congress, President Trump and the DOJ want to appeal and continue with the investigation.

Judge Boasberg concluded that the DOJ has provided no evidence that Chair Powell committed any crime, and that their subpoenas are a pretext to pressure Chair Powell to lower rates as the President demands, or resign.

President Trump wants Chair Powell to leave so that he can control 4 seats out of 7 on the Board of Governors, which effectively would give him control of the Fed.

However, Chair Powell holds the cards.

He will decide when to leave, and he stated that his decision will be based on what is best for the Federal Reserve and the people it serves.

Meanwhile, the DOJ investigation is holding up confirmation for Chair nominee Kevin Warsh.

Senator Thom Tillis has said he sees the DOJ suit as an attack on Fed independence, and he will not allow any Board of Governor confirmation until the DOJ suit has ended.

It is unclear, though, how or when this stalemate will be broken.

As for the bond markets, they are voting to tighten on their own in response to surging oil prices arising from the Middle East conflict. The U.S. Treasury yield curve has flattened, led by surging 2-year Treasury Notes and rising longer-term bond yields.

Global bond yields are climbing as well, as world central banks get ready to fight inflation.